	
	Manuscript # GW20120518-0099 Decision
	editorgw  
	to:
	jdhughes
	06/29/2012 01:31 PM
	Show Details



















History:	This message has been replied to and forwarded.






June 29, 2012: 


Dear Joseph: 

The review of your manuscript "Use of general purpose graphical processing 
units with MODFLOW-2005" is complete.The paper was examined by three 
reviewers. Generally, they liked the paper and recommended publication 
with minor revisions. I concur with their assessment and would ask you to 
undertake revisions that take into account the reviewers' comments listed 
below. This paper is the first of its kind for Ground Water and I think 
readers will be excited about it. 
Many of the suggested changes are technical in nature and these should be 
straightforward. The main issue that I would ask you to address is that of 
"jargon' raised by two of the reviewers. This paper is particular 
important, given its novelty, and yet it will leave many readers behind. I 
think a strong effort to reduce/explain terms on you part could enhance 
the general readability and raise the interest level appropriately. The 
reviewers make suggestions in this respect, but use your own ideas. 
Perhaps a few (2 or 3) sidebar elements in the paper (we do these now) 
could provide something like a running glossary, or alternatively a 
layman's translation to the denser material. Please think about this 
carefully. 
Prepare a response to the reviewers' comments and a revised manuscript. I 
will ask at least one of the reviewers for an opinion regarding the 
revised manuscript. In your response to the reviewers, please list each 
comment separately and state both how you changed the manuscript in 
response and where the changes are located in the revised manuscript (page 
and paragraph). If you disagree with a comment, please say so and make an 
argument in support of your position. 
Please revise your manuscript using a word processing program and save the 
revised copy on your computer. Highlight the changes to your manuscript 
within the document by using the track changes mode in MS Word or by using 
colored text. I ask that at this time you prepare the manuscript in 
accordance with the format used in the journal (see a recent issue of 
Ground Water and/or the guidelines posted on our website www.ngwa.org). 
After 12 June 2009 papers will be edited to use the one-word spelling of 
"groundwater". Please review your paper carefully for factual errors, 
incomplete references, and general flow and readability of text. Also, it 
is good form to name the reviewers who have identified themselves in the 
acknowledgments section of your paper. 
In revising your paper, please keep in mind that there is a page charge of 
$250 for each page over the first 6 published pages. There are 
approximately 950 words per published page but you must also allow space 
for figures, tables and reference citations within the 6 page limit. 
Please check to make sure your figures meet our guidelines listed at 
http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/illustration.asp 

PLEASE NOTE: Beginning in January 2009, all figures submitted in color 
will be published in color in both the online and print versions of the 
article, FREE OF CHARGE. We ask that you keep in mind, however, that NGWA 
incurs additional costs for all color figures. Therefore, please use color 
only when necessary for clarity of presentation. 
Please upload your response (rebuttal) to the reviewers' comments and your 
revised manuscript within *****60 days***** of today's date. Upload these 
files to our website at http://groundwater.msubmit.net using the same 
manuscript number as before. If you need to upload additional files, look 
for the ADD FILE link, which will allow you to upload new files. 
If the manuscript is not returned within the prescribed time we will 
consider the paper withdrawn. If you have a good reason for requiring more 
time to make the revisions, please contact me at gweditor@geology.wisc.edu 
about the possibility of obtaining an extension of the deadline. 
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to "Ground Water." I look forward 
to receiving the revised version of your paper. 

Sincerely yours, 

Frank W. Schwartz 
Editor-in-Chief 
Ground Water 

---------------------------------------- 
Editor's Comments 

1. Our layout doesn't require section numbering, so please delete those. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Reviewer #1 (Written Evaluation (Required)): 

The manuscript discusses a GPGPU (video card) implementation of a PCG 
solver for MODFLOW-2005. This is a topic of keen interest to the MODFLOW 
community, to understand the gains achievable from massively parallel 
processing and get their hands on the tools that can help. I suggest 
publication with the following recommended enhancements to the manuscript. 

1. The introduction should also introduce the speedup potential and 
bottlenecks of GPGPU and parallel CPU processing for the UPCG solver. 
2. Section 2 has too much jargon. I suggest removing what is irrelevant 
and explaining what is, in terms of how that helps speed up or slow down 
GPGPU processing compared to serial computing or multi-core processing on 
CPUs. 
3. The manuscript needs to mention how the solver is available for M2K5 
for the GPGPU and multi-core CPU versions (are they DLLs, how are they 
linked into the main code, etc). I do not expect people to generally 
compile their codes, let alone within CUDA. Some direction therefore is 
needed on accessibility. 
4. Also, direction is needed on hardware that may be best suited for the 
GPUGPU processing will benefit this manuscrit. 
5. GPGPU speedup has been compared to the PCG5 solver on a serial CPU. 
With more advanced solvers coming into the MODFLOW family (for example the 
XMD solver in MODFLOW-NWT,)it would be interesting to note the speedup of 
UPCG compared to even more robust higher level ILU solvers which may be 
even faster than PCG5 for hard problems. 
6. Issues with GPGPU processing for different schemes are scattered 
throughout the manuscript. These issues should be collated into a separate 
section or a table. For instance: GPGPU memory requirements for larger 
problems; need to maximize the amount of time spent in the linear solvers; 
the overhead associated with GPGPU-CPU memory copy operations relative to 
the solution time; higher percentage of runtime spent transferring 
preconditioner data; why the total time spent applying the preconditioner 
actually increases for the MILU0 preconditioner; what is less optimized in 
Intel FORTRAN for multi-core processing; details on problem size 
limitation due to RAM available on the GPGPU; and others. 

Reviewer #2 (Written Evaluation (Required)): 

I have reviewed all the contents of the manuscript "Use of general purpose 
graphical processing units with MODFLOW-2005" by J. Hughes and J. White. 
This work presents results of using the graphical processing unit (GPU) to 
perform calculations needed to solve groundwater heads in in MODFLOW-2005. 
Overall, I think this is a novel work, but I have some concerns. 
1) Overall, lots of jargon is used. Naturally, this is an emerging field, 
and one that many readers of Ground Water will not be familiar with, so 
the use of jargon will be difficult for the uninitiated reader. For 
example, lines 75-79 are filled with terms that will mean nothing to the 
average groundwater modeler - consider deleting (or moving to appendix or 
online material) this paragraph and other similar paragraphs that might 
not hold much meaning to the average reader. 
2) Thorough comparisons were made for different preconditioners and 
different parallelization strategies and the authors did a great job of 
making the comparisons fair. Considering the results of the various 
preconditioners, it appears that Jacobi preconditioning is good enough for 
many of the problems, which leads me to believe that the K fields are 
fairly smooth (and the spread of the eigenvalues are nicely clustered). I 
tend to think of this as the exception in rather than the rule in most 
practical groundwater models. Can you provide guidance for using MIC vs. 
POLY vs. Jacobi based on the K field? In other words, I think these 
results are highly dependent on the K field and only 2 fields are used. 
How would the results vary if you stretched the contrasts in your K field? 
In that regard, to be fair, the GMG solver should also be used as a basis 
for comparison and give insight about which strategy should be used for 
optimal performance. 
3) There seems to be a tradeoff between parallelizing on the CPU vs. the 
GPU depending on the sophistication of the preconditioner. What is not 
clear was if it Open-MP was used on PCG2. Reference is made to the work by 
to Dong and Li, but it appears that this was not considered. How do these 
results compare to that of Dong and Li? The intent here is not to say that 
your results are better/worse than those of Dong and Li. Simply, not 
everyone has access to a video card with double precision GPU 
capabilities, whereas multicore CPU's seem to be more common, so some 
guidance of which strategy might be more effective depending on the user's 
hardware would be helpful (ie, If I were buying a new workstation, should 
I focus on getting the best multicore CPU, or should I get a less powerful 
CPU and spend money on a high-end GPU?) I understand that the answer to 
this question is not straightforward, but any additional insights you 
could provide regarding this tradeoff would be helpful. 
Furthermore, I several minor items for your consideration 

4) Line 26 - "can be *easily* parallelize" 
5) Lines 28 - 34 - there is some time discrepancies here from 2005 to 
1984, to 1988. Perhaps just say "MODFLOW" on line 28 and remove the "since 
1984" and insert "numerous" before "two-and" 6) Line 47 "present" (plural) 
7) Line 48 - unclear - faster at what exactly? Operations,cycles/second? 
8) Lines 75-108 is filled with a lot of technical jargon. Consider moving 
some of this to an appendix (as noted above). 9) Line 108 - really, the 
parallelization you mention can be applied to many simulators, not just 
MODFLOW-2005. Consider mentioning wider range applicability. 10) Line 
213-214 - unclear. Consider rephrasing 11) Line 351 - "developed to *use* 
the PCG" (one does not "solve" the algorithm) 12) Line376 - as indicated 
above, can you provide some guidance here about when one approach might be 
better than another depending on the system properties (size, K field). 
Also, GMG should be included here to so that the full suite of approaches 
are compared (weak but highly parallelizable to strong but not very 
parallelizable). 13) Figure 4 - I think this figure is extremely important 
as it shows where the speed ups occur. However, it is not clear how much 
time is spent in the GPU for the matrix-vector and BLAS operations because 
the bars seem to not show up on the scale? Can you include a value here so 
the reader does not assume these are zero. 14) In light of the speed ups 
coming from CUBLAS operations being parallelized over the cells in the 
model, I am wondering if additional speed up could be obtained by using 
other primitives in the CUSparse library for the triangular solves and/or 
the decomposition? Was this considered as well? There is some new work 
that tries to parallelize ILU (see: 
http://research.nvidia.com/publication/parallel-incomplete-lu-and-cholesky-
factorization-preconditioned-iterative-methods-gpu) 
In summary, I think this manuscript presents some novel approaches for 
exploiting parallel computations to solve groundwater flow problems using 
MODFLOW. I think this is an emerging area, and as such, some additional 
guidance regarding the various tradeoffs would make this article of 
greater utility to the readers of Ground Water. 

Reviewer #2 (Condense Files): 

As indicated above lines 75-108 are filled with jargon and should be 
reconsidered. 

Reviewer #3 (Written Evaluation (Required)): 

I found the manuscript is interesting but think need some revisions. 

1.Quality of figures should be improved (all figures but in particular, 
figures 3 to 6). Texts (titles and legends) are too small to read. Lines 
are very hard to read. 2.Tables should be reworked. I do not think we need 
3 digits after decimal point for these comparisons. Please also consider 
significant digits in the tables. 3.The authors only consider total 
execution time which includes time required for both Picard and linear 
solver iterations. Did you closely examined these iteration performance in 
solver comparisons? How these iteration performance changes among 
different preconditioning schemes? 4.Lines 28-32: the authors mentioned 
computational performance changes due to domain discretization. Does this 
cause by FD formulation or matrix solver scheme? Explanation is needed. 
5.Line 48: 448 -> 448 cores. 6.Line 114: is L3/L3T correct? 
7.Line 123: is L2/T correct? 
8.Line 161: What is CUBLAS? 
9.Line 199: Problem Description. Reasoning for choosing test cases is 
helpful for the readers. 10.Line 236: "(10-0)/1000"is not necessary. 






